---
title:  "About me"
date:   2018-01-02 01:01:01
categories: [aboutme]
tags: [aboutme]
---
<br>
### Hi! I'm Ling Chen, a PhD student in computational biology at Vanderbilt. 
I'm passionate about using creative, data-driven approaches to make scientific 
discoveries and solve problems. My skills are broad: machine learning, statistical 
analyses, data visualization, website development. And I'm always learning more!
<br><br>

### My reasearch projects 
My research interest lies in using machine learning algorithms to model and 
understand the human genome, in order to uncover the association between 
non-coding mutations and the disease.

Here are couple of projects that I've worked on during my graduate school:

- Does DNA has a grammar? <br> 
Designed and implemented interpretation methods for internal layers of deep 
neural networks trained on regulatory DNA sequences to extract "grammar" of 
transcription factor motifs in DNA.

- Machine learning prediction framework for regulatory DNA evolution <br>
Built support vector machine and deep neural network models of 
regulatory regions in mammals and found that the models are highly generalizable
 across species, suggesting a largely conserved regulatory sequence properties.

- Analysis tool for high-throughput sequencing data. <br>
Developed a multiple-processing tool to efficiently analyzing the 
double strand DNA repair pattern with >100k of sequencing reads

<br>
### Work Experience
**Teaching Assistant | Vanderbilt University** <br>
Sep 2014 - Feb 2017 <br>
I instructed 90+ undergraduate students in "Introduction to Biology Lab" course.

**Data Analyst Intern | BGI-Shenzhen** <br>
Jul 2011 - Aug 2011 <br>
I interned with science to production team. I contributed to the development of 
the human disease related gene mutation databse.

<br>
### Education
**Doctor of Philosophy | Vanderbilt University** <br>
2014 - 2019 <br>
Computational Biology

**Bachelor's degree | Nankai University** <br>
2010 - 2014 <br>
Biological Siences, 2014 Poling Class.



<br>
### Publications
[My google scholar](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=MsCTqZIAAAAJ&hl=en)
<br>
**2019** <br>
- Colbran, Laura L., **Ling Chen**, and John A. Capra. "Sequence Characteristics Distinguish Transcribed Enhancers from Promoters and Predict Their Breadth of Activity." Genetics (2019): genetics-301895.

**2018** <br>
- **Chen, Ling**\*, Alexandra E. Fish*, and John A. Capra. "Prediction of gene regulatory enhancers across species reveals evolutionarily conserved sequence properties." PLoS computational biology 14.10 (2018): e1006484.

**2017** <br>
- Fish, Alexandra\*, **Ling, Chen**\*, and John A. Capra. "Gene Regulatory Enhancers with Evolutionarily Conserved Activity Are More Pleiotropic than Those with Species-Specific Activity." Genome biology and evolution 9.10 (2017): 2615-2625.

- Colbran, Laura L., **Ling Chen**, and John A. Capra. "Short DNA sequence patterns accurately identify broadly active human enhancers." BMC genomics 18.1 (2017): 536

**2016** <br>
- Ma, Biao, Hongcheng Cheng, Ruize Gao, Chenglong Mu, **Ling Chen**, Shian Wu, Quan Chen, and Yushan Zhu. "Zyxin-Siah2–Lats2 axis mediates cooperation between Hippo and TGF-β signalling pathways." Nature communications 7 (2016): 11123.

**2015** <br>
- Ma, Biao\*, Yan Chen\*, **Ling Chen**, Hongcheng Cheng, Chenglong Mu, Jie Li, Ruize Gao et al. "Hypoxia regulates Hippo signalling through the SIAH2 ubiquitin E3 ligase." Nature cell biology 17, no. 1 (2015): 95.